CHARLOTTE COUNTY MEDICAL EXAMINER'S OFFICE
Medical Examiner’s Report by Atlas Hartley
CASE NO.: 2025-0471
DECEDENT: Rob Armstrong, Male, 34 years old, 6 ft. 3 in., 205 lbs.
DATE OF AUTOPSY: April 8, 2025
PERFORMED BY: Atlas Hartley, M.D., Chief Medical Examiner
LOCATION: Charlotte County Forensic Facility
Background
I have been the Charlotte County Chief Medical Examiner for the past 5 years. My relevant work
experience and training is listed in my CV.
My understanding is that this case involved the death of a contestant on a reality show called The
Saboteurs that was filming at Hotel Lux. Because the death involved a major media company,
Governor Sullivan called and asked that I personally conduct the autopsy and potential cause of
death determination. Seeing as I was not present at the location of the death when it happened—
which would have been surprisingly convenient—I went to the scene to start my inquiry.
The remains of Rob Armstrong were delivered to the Coroner’s Office in Santa Ivo on the morning
of April 8, 2025. I recorded all relevant conditions of the body in the autopsy. The autopsy was
conducted using the standard techniques set forth by the National Association of Medical
Examiners, which is extensively peer reviewed and the gold standard. I also performed all of the
toxicological analyses discussed below using standard, peer reviewed, and gold standard techniques.
I have used all of the techniques listed below during the entirety of my entire career and applied all
of them in the same standard manner as I always have.
This report is supplemental to the autopsy report and includes my narrative findings and any testing
conducted after the autopsy was complete.
On Scene Findings and Observations
I arrived at the scene of the death, Hotel Lux, at around 2:15pm approximately two hours after
emergency services had been called to the scene for a reported accidental drowning. The subject was
lying on the beach in a supine position about 150 yards from the water’s edge. The subject appeared
to be male and was dressed in swim trunks and had a respirator mask lying near the head. The
subject’s face also had markings that lined up with the edges of the mask, suggesting that the mask
had been on the subject’s face for some time before the death. This was confirmed for me by Riley
Kaye (a producer on the show), who gave me information about the moments leading up to the
death. At the time of this conversation, Riley Kaye was in the custody of law enforcement officers.
Riley Kaye informed me that the subject had been competing in a multi-phase challenge that
included diving into water while wearing the respirator mask. During the dive portion of the

challenge, something went wrong a short while after the dive began and the subject appeared to
struggle under water. Then the subject pulled the respirator off of his face while underwater and
started swimming frantically. He was eventually pulled out of the water by the on-scene rescue
divers, but Kaye was vague as to how long it took the divers to reach him. The time he was pulled
out of the water was 12:12 pm. When he was pulled out of the water, he was unconscious, and they
attempted CPR for 27 minutes without success. On-scene medical staff called the time of death at
12:39 pm. Mr. Armstrong’s body was then transported, securely, to the Charlotte County Forensic
Facility for further examination.
Medical History
The subject’s medical history revealed little of note. I reviewed the extensive medical records
provided to me by the show’s producers. The medical records indicated that the subject was a male
aged 34 years old with no known medical conditions except for a documented mild allergy to cats,
which presented as allergic rhinitis (“Hay Fever”). I confirmed these findings with the subject’s
personal physician. The pre-testing done by the TV show also indicated that the subject was in
excellent athletic condition and overall health.
External Examination
Besides what is noted in the autopsy report, close inspection of the victim’s face revealed what
appeared to be small skin abrasions near the subject’s mouth and nose. Those could be a result of
the subject pulling off the respirator mask violently but, based on my experience, they were more
similar to chemical burns on the skin rather than tears in the skin. Each abrasion was no larger than
1cm in diameter. There were approximately 8 total in the area of the nose and mouth. The lividity
and rigor were consistent with the time window of death told to me by Riley Kaye.
Internal Examination
First, I examined the subject’s mouth. There appeared to be additional abrasions inside the mouth.
These too appeared to be consistent with chemical burns like I had seen on the outside of the
mouth and face. I also noted minimal signs of allergic rhinitis, including slightly inflamed sinuses and
a small amount of mucus in the nasal passages.
Then I opened the chest cavity using a Y incision. All organs were present, except for the appendix,
and all appeared to be intact. When I examined the lungs, I found that they were waterlogged with
frothy fluid that also extended into the airways. The lungs also had petechial hemorrhages in
conjunctiva and pleura, which are secondary to asphyxiation. All of these signs were consistent with
drowning.
There were also signs of irritation and inflammation that you would not see in a simple drowning
case. The trachea and bronchi were irritated consistent with the inhalation of a chemical irritant—
they appeared mildly red and as if they were raw. Most medical examiners would not have seen these

signs of irritation, but I have an extensive background in medical examinations related to
many types of poisonings, including inhalation of foreign substances.
On examination, the brain appeared mildly swollen, a finding consistent with hypoxia, which is the
deprivation of oxygen prior to death. The surface of the brain was smooth, with no signs of external
trauma or internal hemorrhage. No bleeding or contusions within the ventricles or subarachnoid
space, and no signs of blunt force injury. The swelling suggested the victim experienced a period of
oxygen starvation, likely during the final minutes underwater. There was nothing to indicate that any
sort of head injury caused or contributed to disorientation before the death.

The kidneys appeared grossly normal upon preliminary inspection. However, I noticed a slight pallor
of the cortical tissue. This type of change can result from acute metabolic disturbance.
Because of the appearance of metabolic disturbances in the kidneys and the other signs of chemical
exposure, I took additional tissue samples from the kidneys for examination in the pathology lab. I
also took the standard tissue samples from all other organs.
Toxicological Analyses
Using the tissue samples I took from the kidneys, I performed a histological analysis, which involves
slicing the tissue samples into thin sections, mounting them on slides, and staining them with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). From that I did not find anything of note. However, I had a gut
feeling that there was something there. So, I then reviewed a fresh tissue sample from the kidneys
using polarized light microscopy.
In the polarized light microscopy, certain crystals appear birefringent (show double refraction),
which is a fancy way of saying that they shine brightly when the polarized light hits them. When I
examined the subject’s kidney tissue samples, there were signs of calcium oxalate crystal formation
in the tissue samples. Calcium oxalate crystals typically form in fan- or rosette-shaped formations.
Some small crystals had formed throughout the kidney samples. I reviewed 10 kidney tissue samples
to confirm that there were calcium oxalate crystals throughout both kidneys.
Calcium oxalate crystals in and of themselves are not necessarily reason to suspect poisoning, as
calcium oxalate crystals are the most common form of kidney stones. However, the proliferation of
the crystal formation indicates that this was not an instance where the subject was in the early stages
of kidney stone formation but instead was consistent with the introduction of a substance that
would cause such crystalline formations. A few different chemicals can cause formation of such
crystals, including ethylene glycol, oxalic acid, certain medications, and certain underlying medical
conditions.

I ran a basic blood panel on the subject’s blood sample. This showed that the subject had marked
hypocalcemia, which are extremely low serum calcium levels. There were no other notable results
from the basic blood panel.
Because of the calcium oxalate crystals in the kidneys, I then ran an advanced blood panel on the
subject’s blood samples to test for some of the less common poisons. The advanced blood panel
revealed elevated levels of oxalic acid in the subject’s blood. The blood gas analysis revealed that the
subject was in the state of metabolic acidosis, which is a dangerous shift in the body’s pH levels
caused by accumulation of acidic compounds, such as oxalate.
I then ran tests for oxalic acid on the rest of the tissue samples taken from the subject. The highest
concentrations of oxalic acid were in the subject’s mouth, trachea, and bronchi. All levels in these
areas were well outside of the acceptable range of oxalic acid in the body tissue.
Discussion and Conclusions
Based on the autopsy, all of the toxicological tests that I ran, and my extensive experience with
determining cause of death in poisonings, my conclusion is that the subject inhaled a clinically
significant amount of oxalic acid shortly before entering the water for the dive that he undertook.
Most likely, inhalation occurred when the subject first put on the diving mask, based on the
coughing fit he experienced immediately before diving. However, the extent and distribution of
mucosal irritation within the trachea and bronchi indicate that exposure was not limited to a single
inhalation event. Rather, the raw and inflamed appearance of the respiratory tissues suggests
ongoing inhalation over multiple respiratory cycles, consistent with continued breathing of the
chemical irritant during the course of the dive.
The high concentration of oxalic acid in the pulmonary vasculature shows to a high degree of
scientific certainty that oxalic acid was inhaled in powder form. No oxalic acid was found in the
stomach contents or the esophagus, which, therefore, indicates that the only possible manner of
exposure was inhalation. Further, the chemical burns and irritation observed in the mouth and
pulmonary system are also consistent with inhalation as the manner of ingestion. Based on the levels
observed in the blood, the physical signs of inhalation, and the gender, weight, and build of the
subject, the subject was exposed to between 1.2 and 2.1 grams of oxalic acid.
Acute inhalational exposure to oxalic acid in powdered form is known to cause significant
respiratory irritation and systemic toxicity when sufficient quantities are absorbed. The degree of
toxicity depends on the concentration of the substance, the duration of exposure, and the confined
nature of the exposure environment. In this case, the diving mask would have created a confined
microenvironment in which powdered oxalic acid could become aerosolized through the subject’s
respiration and the moisture generated from exhaled breath. This environment would also promote
rebreathing, resulting in repeated inhalation of the irritant over multiple respiratory cycles rather
than a single exposure event. In short, each breath increased the dose of exposure. Based on the
pattern of airway injury, the tissue distribution of oxalic acid, and the associated metabolic findings,

exposure to at least 1 gram of oxalic acid was sufficient to produce medically dangerous side effects.
I cannot determine exactly where in the mask the oxalic acid was located, as the mask flooded when
it was removed. Oxalic acid is highly water-soluble and would have rapidly dissolved upon contact
with water, resulting in the loss of any remaining free residue.
I can also conclude to a reasonable degree of scientific certainty that the inhalation of the oxalic acid
was shortly before or at the time of the beginning of the subject’s dive. After being exposed to
between 1.2-2.1 grams of oxalic acid in a small, confined breathing space, a person of the subject’s
gender, weight, and physical stature would experience the following symptoms at each
corresponding interval:
Time after Exposure Symptoms
10-30 seconds
Mild burning in throat, mild coughing
1-2 minutes
Onset of dizziness, dyspnea (shortness of breath), continued burning at
site of ingestion
4-6 minutes
Muscle weakness and early signs of hypoxia (visual disturbances, and
confusion)
10-15 minutes
Moderate signs of hypoxia (bluish tint to nails and eventually skin,
tunnel vision, disorientation)
20+ minutes
Advanced signs of hypoxia (poor coordination, slurred speech, coma,
and death)
The effects of hypoxia in divers have been extensively studied. When an underwater diver
experiences hypoxia, it can cause them to panic and lose sense of where they are or which direction
is the surface of the water. Divers have been known to become so disoriented that they remove their
masks while still underwater and try to breathe. This then causes them to drown. While hypoxia is a
possible symptom of deep-water diving, the dive in question was no lower than 30 feet below the
surface, well above any depth where the risk of hypoxia is present. While the above symptoms listed
in the table correspond to the effects of oxalic acid poisoning on land, those symptoms all are signs
of the inability of the body to have sufficient oxygen. These symptoms are severely exacerbated
underwater, where physical exertion and resistance to breathing increase oxygen demand. Any
impairment of breathing under these conditions results in rapid air consumption. As a result, the
subject would be expected to use his tank air far more quickly than normal, increasing the risk of
respiratory distress, panic, and loss of consciousness.
I did a review of the dive footage and made notes (Exhibit 5) about the subject’s appearance and
when he began showing signs of struggle. At approximately 5 minutes into the challenge, the subject
began swimming much slower than he had in the prior few minutes or for his athletic level. During
the 8-12 minute mark, he started showing signs of disorientation including appearing like he was not
able to figure out where to move or where to go. Then around the 15-minute mark, he started
showing signs of panic, including removing his mask and inhaling water.

Overall, my conclusion as to the cause of death is drowning induced by oxalic acid poisoning. While
the ultimate cause of death was asphyxiation through drowning, the medical evidence shows that the
hypoxia and resulting panic felt by the subject was caused by inhalation of oxalic acid moments
before the dive occurred. The physical fitness of the subject and their lack of underlying medical
conditions renders it severely unlikely that the resulting hypoxia and drowning would have occurred
absent exposure to oxalic acid. Further, the level of exposure was high enough that even if rescue
divers had attempted to save the subject earlier, he still likely would have died. I cannot say that with
100% certainty, but I find it highly likely.

AFFIDAVIT OF ATLAS HARTLEY, MD
After being duly sworn upon oath, Atlas Hartley hereby states as follows: I am over 18 and
competent to make this affidavit.
I am making this affidavit to supplement my report and identify the relevant exhibits that
I am familiar with in this case. Of the exhibits in this case, I am familiar with the following:
Exhibit 3 the autopsy I performed on Rob Armstrong at the Charlotte County Medical
Examiner’s Office on April 8, 2025.
Exhibit 4 is a postmortem toxicological analysis of Rob Armstrong performed by the
Charlotte County Medical Examiner’s Office. The analysis tested Armstrong’s blood, kidney
tissue, tracheal tissue, bronchial tissue and saliva.
Exhibit 5 is an accurate summary of actions taken by Rob Armstrong during the
underwater portion of the challenge on April 6, 2025. I watched the video, and I can say that it
details everything Armstrong did from the time he entered the water until he was pulled out by
safety divers.
Exhibit 11 is an accurate picture of the mask Rob Armstrong was wearing in the dive
footage I saw. I also directly observed Rob with the mask as it was lying near his head when I
arrived on scene. I examined the mask and its attached air tank during my work in this case.
Exhibit 13 is the label from the bottle of Oxalic Acid from a brand that is quite popular in
Midlands. This is a common cleaning agent. All of the warnings on the bottle are medically
correct based on my years of experience and training. I honestly think the bottle does not go far
enough and should be even more clear about the dangers of oxalic acid.
Exhibit 14 is a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for Oxalic Acid from the Midlands
Product Safety Commission. It details potential hazards associated with Oxalic Acid, first aid
steps to take in the event of contact, as well as steps for handling, storage, and disposal. I am
well aware of these dangers.
Exhibit 20 is a diagram of the land challenge portion of the elimination challenge from
Episode 9 of Season 10 of The Saboteurs. All contestants had to clear the land challenge to
proceed to the water portion of the challenge. I was told this by Riley Kaye, and I also saw parts
of the challenge equipment when I was on the scene.

Exhibit 22 is a still from the footage of the underwater scuba challenge portion of the
elimination challenge on April 6, 2025 before any of the contestants entered the water. The
photograph was taken by The Saboteurs production team for promotional purposes.
Exhibit 27 is the most up-to-date version of my curriculum vitae.
Exhibit 28 is the curriculum vitae of Dr. Grey Marlowe, which I reviewed.
Exhibit 30 is a photograph of Rob Armstrong. This accurately depicts what he looked
like in the video clips I saw of him from Season 10 of The Saboteurs, including the footage from
April 6, 2025.
Exhibit 31 is a sample of oxalic acid taken from the bottle of powdered oxalic acid
collected from the Hotel Lux with the label from Exhibit 13. I asked that if any was collected
that it be no more than roughly 2 grams (1 tsp) of the powder for evidentiary purposes in court.
This accurately depicts what roughly 2 grams (1 tsp) of oxalic acid powder looks like.
Exhibit 32 is the scoop found in Charlie Martin’s backpack during the search of Martin’s
home. According to Exhibit 13, the bottle of oxalic acid was supposed to come with a scoop just
like this one that helped the person using the product measure out the appropriate amount of
oxalic acid as they used it. This scoop delivers approximately one gram of oxalic acid when full
and leveled.
I reviewed the report of Dr. Marlowe, and I disagree with the conclusions made by
Marlowe. There was no reason to suspect that dehydration or exhaustion were the sole cause of
Armstrong panicking underwater. While overexertion could be a possible factor, it is highly
unlikely for someone to have the same level of decline seen in Armstrong’s case solely from
dehydration or exhaustion. Even if they did play a role, they were not as important as the oxalic
acid. Further, there was no indication that any sort of medical conditions, either known or
unknown, led to the hypoxia that ultimately killed Armstrong. I am not familiar with any other
exhibits or any affidavits other than my own, unless otherwise stated in my reports or herein.
I hereby attest to having read the above statement and swear or affirm it to be my own. I
also swear or affirm the truthfulness of its content. Before giving this statement, I was told it
should contain everything I knew that might be relevant regarding the exhibits discussed herein,
and I followed those instructions. I also understand that I can and must update this affidavit if I
remember anything new about the exhibits discussed herein until the moment before I testify in
this case.

3

